docs: add documentation for all secure acl introduction work (#5640)
hashicorp/consul: website/source/docs/acl/acl-auth-methods.html.md

---
layout: "docs"
page_title: "ACL Auth Methods"
sidebar_current: "docs-acl-auth-methods"
description: |-

>   An Auth Method is a component in Consul that performs authentication against a trusted external party to authorize the creation of an appropriately scoped ACL Token usable within the local datacenter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  An auth method is a component in Consul that performs authentication against a trusted external party to authorize the creation of an appropriately scoped ACL Token usable within the local datacenter.
```
"Auth Method" or "auth method" we should be consistent.

>   An Auth Method is a component in Consul that performs authentication against a trusted external party to authorize the creation of an appropriately scoped ACL token usable within the local datacenter.

Author: kait: I made some earlier comment about "Auth Method" vs "auth method". We should be consistent.

>   An Auth Method is a component in Consul that performs authentication against a trusted external party to authorize the creation of an appropriately scoped ACL token usable within the local datacenter.

Author: ```suggestion
  An auth method is a component in Consul that performs authentication against a trusted external party to authorize the creation of an appropriately scoped ACL token usable within the local datacenter.
```

---

-> **1.5.0+:**  This guide only applies in Consul versions 1.5.0 and newer.

# ACL Auth Methods

> An Auth Method is a component in Consul that performs authentication against a

Author: ```suggestion
An auth method is a component in Consul that performs authentication against a
```

> trusted external party to authorize the creation of an appropriately scoped ACL

Reviewer: What does appropriately scoped mean? Correct permissions?

> Token usable within the local datacenter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
token usable within the local datacenter.
```

> The only supported type of auth method in Consul 1.5 is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only supported type of auth method in Consul 1.5.0 is
```

> [`kubernetes`](/docs/acl/auth-methods/kubernetes.html).

Reviewer: I feel like we should capitalize Kubernetes. 
```suggestion
[`Kubernetes`](/docs/acl/auth-methods/kubernetes.html).
```

Author: I had left it as monospace text and lowercased primarily because that's the exact string name you need to provide when configuring it as an auth method.

## Overview

> Without auth methods a trusted operator needs to be critically involved in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without an auth method a trusted operator is critically involved in the
```

> creation and secure introduction of each ACL Token to every application that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creation and secure introduction of each ACL token to every application that
```

needs one, while ensuring that the policies assigned to these tokens follow the
principle of least-privilege.

When running in environments such as a public cloud or when supervised by a
cluster scheduler, applications may already have access to uniquely identifying
credentials that were delivered securely by the platform. Consul auth method

> integrations allow for these credentials to be used to create ACL Tokens with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
integrations allow for these credentials to be used to create ACL tokens with
```

properly-scoped policies without additional operator intervention.

In Consul 1.5.0 the focus is around simplifying the creation of tokens with the
privileges necessary to participate in a [Connect](/docs/connect/index.html)
service mesh with minimal operator intervention.

## Operator Configuration

An operator needs to configure each auth method that is to be trusted by
using the API or command line before they can be used by applications.

* **Authentication** - One or more **auth methods** should be configured with
  details about how to authenticate application credentials. Successful

>   validation of application credentials will return a set of trusted identity

Author: kait: "trusted identity attributes such as ..., ..., and ..." I think a few examples would be helpful here or we could define them somewhere.

  `"dev-${serviceaccount.name}"`

When multiple binding rules match, then all roles and service identities are
jointly linked to the token created by the login process.

## Overall Login Process

Applications are responsible for exchanging their auth method specific secret
bearer token for a Consul ACL token by using the login process:

![diagram of auth method login](/assets/images/auth-methods.svg)

1. Applications use the `consul login` subcommand or the [login API
   endpoint](/api/acl/acl.html#login-to-auth-method) to authenticate to a
   specific auth method using their local Consul client. Applications provide
   both the name of the auth method and a secret bearer token during login.

2. The Consul client forwards login requests to the leading Consul server.

3. The Consul leader then uses auth method specific mechanisms to validate the
   provided bearer token credentials.
   
4. Successful validation returns trusted identity attributes to the Consul
   leader.

5. The Consul leader consults the configured set of binding rules associated
   with the specified auth method and selects only those that match the trusted
   identity attributes.

> 6. Bound roles and service identites are computed. If none are computed the

Author: kait: Where is 6 and 7 happening? So far steps 1-5 are clear and easy to follow, but I get a little lost here. Does it make sense to have two different lists for this process?

   login attempt fails. The bound roles and service identities are assigned to
   a newly-created ACL token created exclusively in the _local_ datacenter.
   
7. The relevant `SecretID` and remaining details about the token are returned to
   the originating Consul client.

8. The Consul client returns the token details back to the application.

9. (later) Applications SHOULD use the `consul logout` subcommand or the
   [logout API endpoint](/api/acl/acl.html#logout-from-auth-method) to destroy
   their token when it is no longer required.

> For more details about specific auth methods and how to configure them, consult

Author: kait: Can we link it here?
